blog post re ctfe ub change observed in 1.64. (#1028)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2022-09-15-const-eval-safety-rule-revision.md

---
layout: post

> title: Const Eval Safety Rules

Author: excellent

author: Felix Klock
description: "Various ways const-eval can change between Rust versions"
team: The Compiler Team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
---

In a recent Rust issue ([#99923][]), a developer noted that the upcoming
1.64-beta version of Rust had started signalling errors on their crate,

> [`icu4x`][icu4x]. The `icu4x` crate makes heavy use of *const-eval*: Rust code

Reviewer: I might be over-indexing on this, but I am concerned people will read the first few sentences and assume there is some problem with Rust's const-eval in general. I think it would be better to mention that `icu4x` uses `const+unsafe` code here rather than saying "they use a lot of const-eval" as that isn't really the problem.

Author: Hopefully addressed by 649bc11a192ec3a817f7406fb94f588eac281479

 --> demo.rs:3:17
  |
3 |     let _copy = illegal_ptr2int;
  |                 ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ unable to turn pointer into raw bytes
  |
  = help: this code performed an operation that depends on the underlying bytes representing a pointer
  = help: the absolute address of a pointer is not known at compile-time, so such operations are not supported
```

As the message says, this operation is not supported: the `transmute` is trying
to above is trying to reinterpret the memory address `&()` as an integer of type
`usize`. The compiler cannot predict what memory address the `()` would be
associated with at execution time, so it refuses to allow that reinterpretation.

When you write safe Rust, then the compiler is responsible for preventing
undefined behavior. When you write any unsafe code (be it const or non-const),
you are responsible for preventing UB, and during const-eval, the rules about
what unsafe code has defined behavior are even more strict than the analogous
rules governing Rust's runtime semantics. (In other words, *more* code is
classified as "UB" than you may have otherwise realized.)

If you hit undefined behavior during const-eval, the Rust compiler will protect

> itself from [adverse effects][const-ub-guide], but there are few guarantees

Author: I was debating about this, e.g. writing something like "const-eval UB won't delete your hard disk at compile-time, or cause type-unsound Rust code to be erroneously accepted by the compiler"; the latter is the kind of adverse effect that I think the const-ub guide is talking about...

(The other option is to say nothing about the compiler protecting itself, but I don't want people to view *this* as a cause for alarm in terms of the safety of invoking the compier itself. After all, that's what proc-macros are for!)

> [...] there is no guarantee that UB is reliably detected during CTFE. This can
> change from compiler version to compiler version: CTFE code that causes UB
> could build fine with one compiler and fail to build with another. (This is in
> accordance with the general policy that unsound code is not subject to
> stability guarantees.)

Having said that: So much of Rust's success has been built around the trust that
we have earned with our community. Yes, the project has always reserved the
right to make breaking changes when resolving soundness bugs; but we have also
strived to mitigate such breakage *whenever feasible*, via things like
[future-incompatible lints][future-incompat].

[future-incompat]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/rustc/lints/index.html#future-incompatible-lints

Today, with our current const-eval architecture layered atop Miri, it is not
feasible to ensure that changes such as the [one that injected][PR #97684] issue
[#99923][] go through a future-incompat warning cycle. Maybe that is an okay
state of affairs; it is hard to tell if we will encounter other cases similar to

> this in the future as Miri and const-eval continue to evolve.

Reviewer: Nit: I don't really love the "Maybe that is ok ..." sentence especially if this is going on the main Rust blog. The framing is very indecisive. 

Personally, I would recommend dropping this sentence and just combining the next paragraph into this one.

Author: Hopefully addressed by f8829c8f3cba7a6873be652388d79f0c04b0f26a

[PR #97684]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/97684

[stability post]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2014/10/30/Stability.html

The compiler team plans to keep our eye on issues in this space. If we see
evidence that these kinds of changes do cause breakage to a non-trivial number
of crates, then we will investigate further how we might smooth the transition
path between compiler releases. However, we need to balance any such goal
against the fact that Miri has very a limited set of developers: the researchers
determining how to define the semantics of unsafe languages like Rust. We do not
want to slow their work down!

## What you can do for safety's sake

If you observe the `could not evaluate static initializer` message on your crate
atop Rust 1.64, and it was compiling with previous versions of Rust, we want you
to let us know: [file an issue][]!

<!--

(Of course we always want to hear about such cases where a crate regresses
between Rust releases; this is just a case that was particularly subtle for us
to tease apart within the project community itself.)

-->

If you can test compiling your crate atop the 1.64-beta before the stable

> release goes out on September 22nd, all the better! One easy way to try the beta

Reviewer: Should we mention that we have done a crate run of this change and didn't find many other problems in the ecosystem?

Author: Hopefully addressed by 8f1060ae4f8a40df5781834f0466c0f44df54648

> is to use [rustup's override shortand][rustup] for it.

Reviewer: Since we're asking people to do something for us, I would suggest we include the appropriate command here so they don't have to look it up from the links provided. 

~~~suggestion
is to use [rustup's override shortand][rustup] for it:

```shell
$ rustup update beta
$ cargo +beta build
```
~~~

Author: great point!

transmute itself! (Which was stated at the outset of this post; here we are just
pointing out that these tools can pinpoint the injection point more precisely.)

Why not have these extra const-ub checks on by default? Well, the checks
introduce performance overhead upon Rust compilation time, and we do not know if
that overhead can be made acceptable. (However, [recent debate][perf argument]
among Miri developers indicates that the inherent cost here might not be as bad
as they had originally thought. Perhaps a future version of the compiler will
have these extra checks on by default.)

[perf argument]: https://rust-lang.zulipchat.com/#narrow/stream/238009-t-compiler.2Fmeetings/topic/.5Bsteering.20meeting.5D.202022-09-02.20const-eval.20and.20future-compa.2E.2E.2E/near/296853344

## Change is hard

You might well be wondering at this point: "Wait, when *is* it okay to transmute
a pointer to a `usize` during const evaluation?" And the answer is simple:
"Never."

Transmuting a pointer to a usize during const-eval has always been undefined behavior,
ever since const-eval added support for
`transmute` and `union`. You can read more about this in the

> `const_fn_transmute` / `const_fn_union` [stabilization report][cftu report],

Reviewer: We really should make sure this is documented on `std::mem::transmute`. I don't think we should require users to find & read the stabilization report to understand the safety conditions.

Reviewer: Ah, it is documented there. https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/mem/fn.transmute.html

Perhaps it would be better to link there or include a mention this is documented there as well?

Author: Addressed in 655b56494e5e49e52d87512ef14905cf985f2c1a

[#99923][] go through a future-incompat warning cycle.
The compiler team plans to keep our eye on issues in this space. If we see
evidence that these kinds of changes do cause breakage to a non-trivial number
of crates, then we will investigate further how we might smooth the transition
path between compiler releases. However, we need to balance any such goal
against the fact that Miri has very a limited set of developers: the researchers
determining how to define the semantics of unsafe languages like Rust. We do not
want to slow their work down!

[PR #97684]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/97684

[stability post]: https://blog.rust-lang.org/2014/10/30/Stability.html

## What you can do for safety's sake

If you observe the `could not evaluate static initializer` message on your crate
atop Rust 1.64, and it was compiling with previous versions of Rust, we want you
to let us know: [file an issue][]!

<!--

(Of course we always want to hear about such cases where a crate regresses
between Rust releases; this is just a case that was particularly subtle for us
to tease apart within the project community itself.)

-->

> We have done a [crater run] for the 1.64-beta and that did not find any other

Reviewer 2: Might want to add a short explanation on what a "crater run" is.

Reviewer: Here's my idea, link to the results and link "crater run" to the explanation of crater in the rustc dev guide. 

```suggestion
We have [performed][crater results] a [crater run] for the 1.64-beta and that did not find any other
```

Changing "done" to "performed" to make the link slightly more noticeable.

instances of this particular problem.
If you can test compiling your crate atop the 1.64-beta before the stable
release goes out on September 22nd, all the better! One easy way to try the beta
is to use [rustup's override shortand][rustup] for it:

```shell
$ rustup update beta
$ cargo +beta build
```

> [crater run]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/100327

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[crater results]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/100327#issuecomment-1214457275
[crater run]: https://rustc-dev-guide.rust-lang.org/tests/crater.html
```
